AGREDIENTS

<!-- image -->

## MarinTrust Identity Preserve Model

Document A7 -Version 2.0

Issued May 2023 -Effective July 2023

Prepared by: MarinTrust Reviewed by: Technical Assurance Committee Approved by: Governing Body Committee

<!-- image -->

## 1. Introduction

The MarinTrust Programme is an international certification programme for the marine ingredients value chain consisting of:

- · The MarinTrust Standard: The verification and certification of marine ingredients factories that source their raw material from approved fisheries and by-product fisheries.
- · The MarinTrust Chain of Custody (CoC) Standard: The verification and certification of the chain  of  custody  for  marine  ingredients  (products)  that  come  from  MarinTrust  certified factories along the value chain to the customer.
- · The Improver Programme: The verification and acceptance of marine ingredients factories that source their raw material from accepted MarinTrust Improver fisheries.

The Identity Preserve (ID) Model is a mechanism which allows an applicant / certificate holder of the MarinTrust Chain of Custody (CoC) Standard to become a 'sponsor' for one or more of its supplying fishmeal and/or fish oil production facilities, which is subcontracted by the applicant/certificate holder to produce MarinTrust certified marine ingredients on their behalf which is unable or unwilling to gain MarinTrust certification in its own right.

This  model  supports  accessibility  to  the  Programme.  It  is  a  pathway  to  help  production  facilities eventually gain certification independently.

## 2. Purpose

This document outlines the process and requirements to provide a robust mechanism, the ID Model, to:

- · Enable  MarinTrust  CoC  applicants  /  certificate  holders  to  sponsor  fishmeal  and/or  fish  oil production facilities that they subcontract to undertake production of MarinTrust certified marine ingredients.
- · Maintain the integrity, credibility, and robustness of the traceablity of certified raw material and marine ingredients throughout the value chain.

## 3. Scope &amp; applicability

This document is intended for internal use by MarinTrust and external use by applicants, certificate holders, certification bodies and any other parties involved with the programme.

The ID model is for MarinTrust CoC applicants and/or certificate holders where the supplying fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility:

- · Is a subcontractor to the MarinTrust CoC applicant / certificate holder, and Does not currently hold or wish to gain certification against the MarinTrust standard on an individual basis.

<!-- image -->

## 4. Terms and Definitions

CoC Sponsor: A CoC facility that wishes to sponsor a fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility which is not MarinTrust certified independently, for subcontracting the production of MarinTrust certified marine ingredients.

Sponsored production facility: A fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility that is subcontracted to undertake production of MarinTrust certified marine ingredients, on behalf of a CoC certificate holder, which is not MarinTrust certified independently.

Chain  of  Custody  (FAO  derived  definition): The  set  of  measures  designed  to  guarantee  that  the marine ingredients put on the market and bearing the MarinTrust logo is a product of designated origin and coming from the certified factory concerned (or in the case of IP, a factory sponsored by a CoC certificate holder). These measures thus cover both the tracking/traceability of the product all along  the  processing,  distribution,  and  marketing  chain,  as  well  as  the  proper  tracking  of  the documentation and control of the quantity concerned . 1

Applicant: A company or group of companies in the supply chain that has formally applied to meet the MarinTrust Standard or Chain of Custody Standard through the formal application form.

Certificate Holder: A facility that has been formally certified by a MarinTrust registered Certification Body as complying with the MarinTrust Standard and/or the Chain of Custody Standard.

MarinTrust Subcontractor: When referring to a subcontractor for the purposes of the production of MarinTrust marine ingredients (such as fishmeal and fish oil) this relates to a third party or affiliate that  is  appointed  under  a  contract  or  an  agreement  to  carry  out  activities,  services,  or  handle MarinTrust approved raw material and/or MarinTrust certified marine ingredients on behalf of the applicant  or  certified  facility. This  includes:  processors,  packers,  encapsulators,  transportation, companies, distribution companies, storage facilities, used to undertake part of the production or handling of marine ingredients including storage, transport, labelling, mixing, packaging.

Legal ownership: The right to possession and the power to convey those rights over the MarinTrust certified material. Ownership can be in the form of a signed contract or other binding agreement that establishes the relationship between the fishmeal and/ fish oil and the supply chain actor. Ownership thus  begins  with  such  a  binding  agreement  and  does  not  necessarily  require  physical  arrival  of shipment.

https://www.fao.org/3/i1119t/i1119t.pdf

<!-- image -->

## 5. Identity Preserve Model Procedure

The CoC applicant/certificate holder shall:

- · Submit an application / scope extension Chain of Custody application form to MarinTrust as outlined in Section 5.3 (this shall include a clear process flow chart and company organigram).
- · Indicate their intention to become a sponsor of a supplying fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility provided:
- 1. The supplying fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility does not have its own certification against the MarinTrust standard.
- 2. The fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility meets with the requirements outlined in Section 5.2 .
- · Provide key details of the facility they intend to sponsor including:
- o Company name
- o Company address
- o Site name ( if different from company )
- o Site address ( if different from company )

The CoC applicant/certificate holder shall be defined as a sponsor.

The subcontracted fishmeal and/or fish oil producing facility shall be defined as sponsored.

## 5.1 Requirements for a Chain of Custody sponsor

The sponsor CoC company shall:

- 5.1.1 Have a signed contract in place with the fishmeal and/or fish oil production facility they intend to sponsor which shall require the production facility to:
- · comply with Section 5.2 herein and all process requirements of the MarinTrust Programme
- · retain records of all packaging that incorporates the MarinTrust logo or makes any reference to MarinTrust certified status of the fish meal or fish oil produced, received and/or sent to the sponsored facility
- · provide and retain relevant training records
- 5.1.2 Pay all annual MarinTrust administration and Certification Body (CB) auditing costs for its own CoC Certification and on behalf of its sponsored production facility in accordance with invoicing and payment requirements of the three-year certification cycle.
- 5.1.3 Ensure that the sponsor production facility understands the ID Preserve Model mechanism and objective, the claims that may and may not be made by the sponsored production facility (outlined in Section 9) shall therefore not receive a MarinTrust certificate ( Section 6 )
- 5.1.4 Maintain up-to-date records of all the subcontractor sites used, including their name and address, the nature and conditions of the contract and all relevant records of all approved MarinTrust raw fish materials associated with the subcontractor.

<!-- image -->

- 5.1.5 Have a separate mass balance evaluation for each sponsored production facility to demonstrate the origin and quantities of all MarinTrust certified raw materials and marine ingredients.

## 5.2 Sponsored production facility requirements

The sponsored production facility shall:

- 5.2.1 Be a separate legal entity and subcontracted supplier to the CoC sponsor
- 5.2.2 Undergo  an  audit  against  the  MarinTrust  Standard  in  accordance  with  document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs) and comply with all requirements of the Standard.
- 5.2.3 Comply with all process requirements of the MarinTrust programme as outlined in the Quality Management System (QMS) including, but not limited to:
- ▪ Allow the CB access to its site to undertake a full MarinTrust factory audit.
- ▪ Ensure all nonconformities raised during the MarinTrust audit of the sponsored facility are correctly  closed  off  to  be  in  full  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  the  MarinTrust Standard.
- ▪ All raw fish materials used in the production of MarinTrust compliant fishmeal and fish oil shall  be  sourced  from  fisheries  or  by-products  that  have  been  approved  under  the MarinTrust Standard.
- 5.2.4 Inform the CoC sponsor immediately in the case that an issue has incurred that has resulted in  noncompliant MarinTrust material being supplied to or on behalf the sponsor. This will include, but is not limited, to the following:
- -Non-approved MarinTrust raw fish material available for production of certified product.
- -Approved MarinTrust raw materials are mixed with non-approved raw materials during the manufacturing process.
- -The MarinTrust compliant fishmeal and/or fish oil is mixed with noncompliant fishmeal and/or fish oil at any stage.
- -There is a change to the sponsored facility certification status against a standard recognised as equivalent under the MarinTrust standard.
- -The manufacturing site has its legal licence to operate removed by its national regulatory authority.
- · Retain all relevant training records and records of all the approved raw material it processes and nonapproved raw material it processes, if applicable, to allow the CB to cross check and confirm with the MarinTrust applicant/certificate holder's own records.

## 5.3 Applications under the Identity Preserve Model

Production facilities may be sponsored:

<!-- image -->

- · by only one CoC sponsor at any time.
- · for one full certification cycle (3 years). Following the end of the 3-year certificate cycle the production facility shall seek independent certification

The application shall be submitted and processed in line with A2 - Guideline for CBs Managing Applications to Certification for the MarinTrust Programme.

The CoC sponsor shall:

- a) For the sponsored subcontractor facility: Complete the current MarinTrust application form for any facility it wishes to sponsor under the ID Preserve Model
- b) For the CoC sponsor:
- I. For initial and recertification applicants - Complete the current MarinTrust CoC application form
- II. For changes to existing certification - Complete the MarinTrust CoC scope extension form

Upon receipt of the application form(s), MarinTrust Operations Manager, or delegated/responsible person, shall review and approve the completed application form in line with internal guidance for the approval of applications .

Upon approval of the application form(s), the Operations Manager, or delegated/responsible person, shall issue an invoice to the CoC sponsor in line with the Invoicing Procedure .

## The CoC sponsor company shall:

- · Be  responsible  for  the  total  payment  of  MarinTrust  administration  fees  on  behalf  of  the sponsored production facility including company and site registration, fishery and by-product assessments, logo use, and other costs.
- · Pay the invoice in full within 14 calendar days from receipt in line with the Invoicing Procedure.
- · Be responsible for all costs in associated with the auditing process carried out by their selected CB

Within 24 hours of receiving payment, the Operations Manager, or delegated/responsible person, shall:

- · Send confirmation that payment has been received to the CoC sponsor and that their application will be sent to their selected CB.
- · Send the application form(s) and additional documents that may be required to the selected CB and shall indicate that they are part of the ID Preserve Model.

<!-- image -->

## 5.4 Assessment  and  audits  under  the  Identity  Preserve Model

Upon receiving applications under the ID Preserve Model, the CB shall:

- · Conduct all fishery and by-product assessments in line with document A3 - Conducting MarinTrust Fishery or By-product Fishery Assessments by Registered Certification Bodies required by the sponsored production facility.
- · Conduct all factory and CoC audits in line with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs).

The CB shall ensure that:

- · All audit reports for the sponsored production facility and CoC sponsor are issued separately.
- · The auditor includes in the notes and/or the company name section of the audit report that the 'audit is for I dentity Preserved Model'.

Where the CoC sponsor is a new applicant to the Programme and therefore does not hold MarinTrust CoC certification:

- 5.4.1 All fishery and by-product assessments required under the scope of the sponsored production facility under ID Preserved Model shall have been carried out prior to undergoing audit.
- 5.4.2 At least one sponsored production facility (if sponsoring multiple), must have undergone a successful audit audited against the current MarinTrust Standard in accordance with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs) prior to the CoC sponsor undergoing an initial audit against the CoC Standard.
- 5.4.3 Upon a successful compliance result of at least one sponsored production facility the applying CoC sponsor shall be audited against the current CoC standard including all subcontracted facilities (e.g., external storage, processing, other) in accordance with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs) and comply with all requirements of the Standard to ensure that all internal controls are robust and are being maintained to protect the providence of the MarinTrust certified fishmeal and/or fish oil.
- 5.4.4 Where the sponsored production facility does not have a successful compliance result, the following shall apply:
- · The sponsored production facility shall not proceed further under the ID Preserve process and shall not be added to a certificate annex (see Section 6 herein for further information on certificates).
- · The CoC sponsor shall not proceed further under the ID Preserve or undergo a CoC audit unless at least one sponsored production facility has successfully passed the MarinTrust audit.
- · The applying sponsor CoC shall not proceed further under the ID Preserve however may continue the process for CoC certification if receiving approved raw material from other MarinTrust certified facilities.

<!-- image -->

Note: Where the CoC sponsor is sponsoring multiple production facilities, the audits of sponsored facilities and the CoC sponsor shall be conducted within a maximum period of 90 days to ensure continuity and validity of claims are fair

- 5.4.5 Upon a successful compliance result, the applying sponsor CoC facility shall be issued a CoC certificate and accompanying certificate annex for the ID preserve production facility. See Section 6 or further information.

Where the CoC sponsor does currently hold MarinTrust CoC Certification:

- 5.4.6 All fishery and by-product assessments required by the sponsored production factory under ID Preserved Model shall be carried out prior to the CoC sponsor audit in line with document A3 Conducting MarinTrust Fishery or By-product Fishery Assessments by Registered Certification Bodies
- 5.4.7 The sponsored production facility under ID Preserve Model shall be audited against the current MarinTrust Standard in accordance with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs).
- 5.4.8 Upon a successful compliance result, the sponsored production facility shall be included in the Chain of Custody certificate of the CoC sponsor. See Section 6 for further information.
- 5.4.9 Where the sponsored production facility does not have a successful audit, the following shall apply:
- · The sponsored production facility shall not proceed further under the ID Preserve process and shall not be added to a certificate annex (see Section 6 herein for further information on certificates).

The CoC sponsor shall not claim product sourced from this sponsored production facility is MarinTrust certified.

<!-- image -->

## 6. Issuing,  suspension,  and  withdrawal  of  certificate  of compliance

All certificates shall be issued, suspended, and withdrawn in line with the ' Procedure for issuing and withdrawal of certificates to the MarinTrust Certification Programme' .

## 6.1 Issue of certificates

## A MarinTrust certificate shall be issued to the sponsor CoC only .

The sponsored production facility under the ID preserve shall not receive a MarinTrust certificate. Instead, the CB shall include an annex MarinTrust certificate within the sponsor CoC certificate.

The annex MarinTrust certificate shall:

- 1. State that the production facility is  under the Identity Preserve ' Model'.
- 2. Include  all  information  in  relation  to  the  sponsored  production  facility  supplier  under  ID Preserved Model.  See Section 4.1. MarinTrust (MT) Standard for the certificate information requirements in document A5 - Procedure for issuing and withdrawal of certificates to the MarinTrust Certification Programme' .

Where the CoC sponsor did not hold MarinTrust CoC certification at the time of application to the ID Preserve Model, the CB shall issue the CoC sponsor certificate and certificate annex of the sponsored production facility under ID Preserved Model simultaneously, and in line with Section 5.4.

Where the CoC sponsor did hold MarinTrust CoC certification at the time of application to the ID Preserve Model, the CB shall add the certificate annex of the sponsored production facility under ID Preserve Model to the current certificate of the CoC sponsor in line with Section 5.4.

## 6.2 Suspension and withdrawal of certificates

In cases where either the sponsored production facility or the CoC sponsor

- · fails to  comply  with  any  of  the  requirements  as  detailed  in  MarinTrust  Certification Programme  and  the  CB's  own  'Rules  Governing  Certification', and  has  resulted  in  a suspension or withdrawal
- · have  optionally  withdrawn  from  the  Identity  Preserve  Model  and/or  MarinTrust  CoC certification

their certification status under the ID preserve shall be suspended and/or withdrawn in line with the ' Procedure for issuing and withdrawal of certificates to the MarinTrust Certificat ion Programme' .

The following shall apply:

## 6.2.1 Suspension

## Suspension - sponsored production facility

Where the sponsored production facility has failed to comply with any of the requirements and has resulted in suspension of its certification under the ID Preserve Model:

- a) Where the CoC sponsor does not receive approved raw material from either:
- i) another subcontracted production facility it sponsors and/or
- ii) other MarinTrust certified facilities
- its certificate shall also be suspended.
- b) Where the CoC sponsor does receive approved raw material from:
- i) either another subcontracted production facility it sponsors and/or
- ii) MarinTrust certified facilities

its  certificate shall  not be  suspended,  however,  the  CoC  sponsor shall  not claim  product sourced from this sponsored production facility is MarinTrust certified.

## Suspension -CoC sponsor

Where the CoC sponsor has failed to comply with any of the requirements and has resulted in suspension of its certification this shall also apply for the sponsored production facility and the following options shall apply:

- i) Seek another CoC sponsor
- ii) Apply for individual certification

See Section 8 for further information.

The  subcontracted  production  facility  may  continue  to  supply  raw  materials  to  the  CoC  facility, however,  there  shall  be  no  claims  of  MarinTrust  certified  material  made  by  either  sponsor  or sponsored facility. Segregation rules as outlined in the Coc Standard must also be applied.

Suspension pending investigation of the CoC sponsor and/or sponsored production facility shall be noted on the MarinTrust website next to the CoC sponsor as follows:

- · Raw  material  supplier  sponsored  under  ID  Preserve  Model  only  suspended  pending further investigation.
- · Suspended pending further investigation  including  the  raw material  supplier  under  ID Preserve Model

<!-- image -->

## 6.2.2 Withdrawal

## Withdrawal - sponsored production facility

Where the sponsored production facility has failed to comply or optionally withdrawn from the ID Preserve Model the following shall apply:

- c) Where the CoC sponsor does not r eceive approved raw material from:
- i) either another subcontracted production facility it sponsors and/or
- ii) MarinTrust certified facilities

its  certificate  shall  be  suspended,  during  which  time  the  CoC  facility  shall  seek  alternative approved raw material sources from currently MarinTrust certified facility, or, the sponsorship of another production facility. Should this not be possible during the suspension period the certificate shall be withdrawn.

- d) Where the CoC sponsor does receive approved raw material from
- iii) either another subcontracted production facility it sponsors and/or
- iv) MarinTrust certified facilities

its  certificate shall  not be  withdrawn  or  suspended;  however,  the  CB  shall  remove  the certificate  annex  of  the  subcontracted  production  facility  supplier  from  the  CoC  company certificate.

The CoC sponsor must ensure it does not make any claims of MarinTrust certification and segregation rules as outlined in the MarinTrust Standard must be applied.

## Withdrawal -CoC sponsor

Where the CoC sponsor has failed to comply or optionally withdrawn from the ID Preserve Model or MarinTrust CoC Certification the sponsored production facility shall be withdrawn and the following options shall apply:

- i) Seek another CoC sponsor
- ii) Apply for individual certification

See Section 8 for further information.

The  subcontracted  production  facility  supplier  may  continue  to  supply  raw  materials  to  the  CoC facility, however, there shall be no claims of MarinTrust certified material made by either sponsor or sponsored facility. Segregation rules as outlined in the Coc Standard must also be applied.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 7. Maintaining  certification  under  the  Identity  Preserve Model

To maintain certification status, participants of the ID Preserve Model shall undergo annual surveillance audits in line with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs) .

Where either the sponsored production facility or the CoC sponsor facility fails to comply with the standard and/or process requirements of the MarinTrust programme the CB shall proceed accordingly in line with Section 6 herein and the ' Procedure for issuing and withdrawal of certificates to the MarinTrust Certification Programme' .

## 8. Transferring from Identity Preserve Model to independent certification

The sponsored production facility may wish to transfer from the ID preserve Model to independent certification.

The 2 key instances in which this might occur includes:

- 1. Following the completion of the 3-year certificate cycle under the ID Preserve Model
- 2. Prior to the completion of 3-year certificate cycle under the ID Preserve Model

Note: At no point is a production facility be permitted to be sponsored facility and hold MarinTrust certification concurrently.

## 8.1 Transfer  following  completion  of  3-year  certification cycle

Upon completion of the 3-year certification cycle, the sponsored production facility is required to seek certification independently from its sponsor as follows:

- 8.1.1 The sponsored production facility shall complete and submit the MarinTrust application form at least 6 months prior to the expiry of the validity of their certification under the ID Preserve Model.
- 8.1.2 The application shall be considered as a new applicant (and new certification cycle) and shall be processed as such in line with the MarinTrust Quality Management System (QMS).

Note: Where the production facility does not submit the required application and documentation within the specified timeframes this may result in a lapse between the ID Preserve claims they are able to make and MarinTrust certification claims following independent certification.

Where a production facility is unable to apply for independent certification following the 3-year certification cycle under the ID Preserve, the production facility may be sponsored by another CoC facility for another 3-year certification cycle.

Productions facilities shall not be permitted:

- · to be sponsored for more than 2 certification cycles.
- · to be sponsored by the same CoC facility for more than one certification cycle unless the sponsored facility explicitly states their willingness to do so.

## 8.2 Transfer prior completion of 3-year certification cycle

The sponsored production facility may transfer from the ID Preserve Model at any time. The following options shall apply:

## Immediate transfer

Where the sponsored production facility wishes to cease participation of the ID Preserve with immediate effect prior to the completion of 3-year certificate cycle under the ID Preserve Model the sponsored facility shall:

- 8.2.1 first notify its CoC Sponsor and MarinTrust in writing of its intention to seek MarinTrust certification independently at least 6 months prior to its next due surveillance audit.
- 8.2.2 no longer be considered as part of the ID Preserve Model with immediate effect. This shall be treated as a 'withdrawal' in line with Section 6.2.
- 8.2.3 complete and submit the MarinTrust application form at least 6 months prior to its next due surveillance audit.
- 8.2.4 The sponsor facility shall undergo an initial MarinTrust audit, in line with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs)

Note: The application shall be considered as a new applicant (and new certification cycle) and shall be processed as such in line with the MarinTrust Quality Management System (QMS).

## Transfer transition

Where the sponsored production facility wishes to cease participation of the ID Preserve via a process of transition prior to the completion of 3-year certificate cycle under the ID Preserve Model the sponsored facility:

- 8.2.5 first notify its CoC Sponsor and MarinTrust in writing of its intention to seek certification independently at least 6 months prior to its next due surveillance audit.
- 8.2.6 Complete and submit the MarinTrust application form at least 6 months prior to its next due surveillance audit.
- 8.2.7 The sponsor facility shall remain part of the ID Preserve Model until the next due surveillance date, as such, all requirements under the ID Preserve Model shall remain applicable.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- 8.2.8 The sponsor facility shall undergo an initial MarinTrust audit, in line with document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of Custody audits by Registered Certification Bodies (CBs) at least 3 months prior to the due surveillance audit under the ID Preserve Model.

8.2.9 Upon successful compliance result:

- · the new MarinTrust certificate shall be issued on the due date of the surveillance audit under the ID Preserve Model, and in line with document A5 -Procedures for issuing and withdrawal of certificates to the MarinTrust certification programme.
- · The production facility shall be removed from the CoC sponsor facility certificate annex on the same day of the issuance of the new certificate and shall no longer be considered as part of the ID Preserve Model.

Note: The application shall be considered as a new applicant (and new certification cycle) and shall be processed as such in line with the MarinTrust Quality Management System (QMS).

## 9. MarinTrust Logo and claim usage

The sponsor CoC company shall sign the Licence Agreement and Claims Policy . The MarinTrust logo and claim may only be used by the CoC certificate holder. Refer to MarinTrust Logo Management Procedure for further information.

The sponsored production facility shall sign the ID preserve model Licence Agreement and Claims Policy and:

- · May only sell 'MT certified' product to their sponsor CoC facility as covered by the audit scope.
- · Shall not use MarinTrust logo/ claim with their brand, and in other products not covered by the audit scope, or for any other company that is not the sponsor.

It is the responsibility of the sponsor CoC company to ensure the products being received are the approved material under their scope.

Note: production facilities who are certified under the ID Preserve Model may:

- 1. produce fishmeal and/or fish oil with raw materials that are not approved or under the scope for the ID Preserve certification however, segregation rules as outlined in the MarinTrust Standard must be applied and the product shall not be sold to the CoC sponsor company as MarinTrust certified product.
- 2. produce and sell fishmeal and/or fish oil to other companies however they must not make any claims or reference that this product is MarinTrust certified.

## 10. Record Keeping

All records shall be kept in line with the A2 - Guideline for CBs Managing Applications to Certification for the MarinTrust Programme and as follows:

<!-- image -->

- -All MarinTrust application forms shall be kept in the applicant/certificate holder's file.
- -The CB shall maintain a database for the managing of all applications under the MarinTrust Programme.

The CoC sponsor shall maintain up-to-date records of all the sponsored subcontractor production facilities used under the ID Preserve Model. This shall include at least:

- · Name and address of subcontractor production facility suppliers
- · Nature and conditions of the contract
- · All relevant records of all approved MarinTrust raw materials associated with subcontractor production facility.
- · All  relevant  records  of  finished  marine  ingredients,  produced  from  the  approved  raw materials.

The sponsored subcontractor production facility supplier under ID Preserved Model shall keep records of all the approved raw material and non-approved raw material it processes .

<!-- image -->

## AMENDMENT LOG

| DATE         |   ISSUE | AMENDMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | AUTHORISED BY             |
|--------------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| October 2022 |       2 | MarinTrust Header and Footer inserted                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Governing Body  Committee |
| October 2022 |       2 | Reference to IFFO RS updated to  MarinTrust throughout                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Governing Body  Committee |
| October 2022 |       2 | Update of document title to ensure  explicitness in its function                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Governing Body  Committee |
| October 2022 |       2 | Update to terminology throughout to  ensure consistency with MarinTrust  quality management system  documents.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Governing Body  Committee |
| October 2022 |       2 | Update to the introduction, purpose  and, scope of the document for  relevancy and clarity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Governing Body  Committee |
| January 2023 |       2 | Addition of general guidance on the  Identity Preserve Model Procedure in  Section 5.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Governing Body  Committee |
| January 2023 |       2 | Update to  Section 5.1  and  5.2  to ensure  clarity on the requirement for CoC  sponsors and sponsored production  facilities.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Governing Body  Committee |
| January 2023 |       2 | Addition of detailed guidance for the  following processes under the ID model  o Application process ( Section 5.3 )   o  Audit process ( Section 5.4 )   o  Issue, suspension, and withdrawal of  certificates ( Section 6 )   o  Maintenance of certification ( Section  7 )   o  Transfer from ID Model to  independent certificate ( Section 8 ) | Governing Body  Committee |