<!-- image -->

## MarinTrust Identity Preserve Model transition document from V1.0 to V2.0

## About this document

MarinTrust  has  reviewed and  significantly  revised  the  Identity  Preserve  Model  to  ensure  ongoing relevancy,  efficiency  and  accuracy,  and  in  line  with  annual  review  requirements  of  the  assurance system.  Version  2.0  of  the  procedure  has  been  issued  following  approval  by  the  Governing  Body Committee (GBC).

This document outlines the significant changes and is intended to help certificate holders, Certification Bodies (CBs), and other interested stakeholders and parties, to understand the transition period from Version 1.0 to Version 2.0 of the Identity preserve Model.

## What are the changes and when will they come into effect?

From the date of issue of Version 2.0 of the Identity Preserve Model, there will be a 2-month transition period to allow both current certificate holders/applicants and new applicants to adjust to the new version of the procedure.

Version 2.0 of the Identity Preserve Model shall be effective from 1st July 2023 and shall supersede and replace V1.0 issued June 2014.

## An overview of the key changes and developments are outlined as follows:

- · Section 1 -3  The introduction, purpose, and the scope and applicability have been updated : to ensure it reflects purpose and scope of the Identity Preserve Model, current practices of the Programme, marine ingredient industry needs.
- · Updated Terms and Definitions (now Section 4) and applied throughout the procedure.
- · Updated Identity Preserve Model procedure and requirements of participants (now Section 5)
- · Addition of more detailed guidance for the following processes under the Identity Preserve Model:
- -Application process (Section 5.3)
- -Assessment and audit process (Section 5.4)
- -Issuing, suspension, and withdrawal of certificates (Section 6)
- -Maintenance of certification (Section 7)
- -Transfer from Identity preserve Model to independent certificate (Section 8)
- -MarinTrust logo and claim use (Section 9)
- -Records (Section 10)

<!-- image -->

Following the effective date,

- · All new applicants  from  1st  July  2023  onwards  shall  follow  the  requirements  outlined  in version 2.0 of the Identity Preserve Model.
- · Certificate holders or applicants currently undergoing the process shall follow this procedure for their pending activities.