WGREDIENTS

<!-- image -->

## Certification Body (CB) Approval Requirements for MarinTrust Audits and Certification

Document D1 - Version 3.0

Issued May 2023 - Effective June 2023

Prepared by:

MarinTrust

Reviewed by:

Technical Assurance Committee

Approved by: Governing Body Committee

## Introduction

The  MarinTrust  Programme  is  owned  by  the  MarinTrust  Governing  Body  Committee  (GBC)  and operated by the MarinTrust Secretariat. The Programme certifies that marine ingredients, such as fishmeal and fish oil, are manufactured responsibly and produced from fishery material supplied from responsibly managed fisheries.

The Programme consists of a set of standards applicable for marine ingredient producers and the chain of custody of compliant material through the supply chain.

This  document  describes  the  requirements  necessary  for  certification  bodies  (CBs)  to  apply  and become successfully registered to carry out auditing, assessment, and certification services on behalf the MarinTrust Programme.

Only CBs that are registered and formally recognised by MarinTrust are authorised to conduct factory or Chain of Custody audits and fishery /by-product assessments against the MarinTrust programme.

## Scope

The scope of CB approval requirements is for the auditing, assessment and certification, or acceptance in the case of the Improver Programme, activities under the MarinTrust Programme.

<!-- image -->

## 1. Certification Body registration with MarinTrust

CBs wishing to apply to be formally registered to certify, and grant acceptance in the case of Improver Programme, against the MarinTrust Programme standards shall:

- 1.1.1. Be able to meet with all the requirements as outlined within this document, including, but not limited to, the competency and training requirements for CB personnel and individual auditors and assessors.
- 1.1.2. Apply for formal registration in accordance with document D2 -Procedural approval criteria for Certification  Body  applicants  wishing  to  apply  for  approval  to  audit  and  certify  against  the MarinTrust Programme.
- 1.1.3. Have a global reach for the provision of audit, assessment, and certification services for the MarinTrust Programme, with an emphasis on ensuring a geographical coverage in all regions but particularly Europe, Asia, and Africa.

## 2. General requirements

## 2.1.Organisational structure

- In accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 accreditation and MarinTrust Quality Management System (QMS) requirements the CB shall:
- 2.1.1. Identify and clearly document ownership and organisational structure, roles, responsibilities, accountability and authorisations of management, personnel and committees involved in the management, operations, and decision making of the certification process which shall include the lines of authority and associated parties.
- 2.1.2. Ensure that all certification activities are  structured to safeguard impartiality and shall have established processes and procedures for the appointment, terms of reference, and operations of all contracted and subcontracted CB personnel and committees, in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 and MarinTrust standard and QMS requirements.

## 2.2.Quality Management System

As part of the application for registration, the CB shall:

- 2.2.1. Be able to demonstrate, through the provision of evidence, that it has a fully documented and implemented QMS and a defined Management Structure, which shall be in accordance with accreditation and MarinTrust standard and programme requirements which shall include, at a minimum, the following key elements:
- · A documented procedure for the management of personnel (contracted and subcontracted).  involved  in  fishery  assessment,  facility  audits,  and/or  certification activities on behalf of the Programme which shall include:
- o the determination of criteria and training needs
- o the determination of competence of personnel
- o the granting of formalised approval and authorisations
- o the ongoing monitoring of competence and performance
- · A description of how the CB will manage the certification process, including precertification activities, planning, conducting, and reporting of fishery assessments and facility audits, technical review, and certification decision processes.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- · Procedures for actions taken in response to any nonconformity raised during an audit or a  failed  clause  in  a  fishery  assessment  are  required,  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of agreed objective evidence presented, or corrective or preventative actions taken by the applicant.
- · Procedures  in  relation  to  the  use  of  the  MarinTrust  Programme  certificates,  rules  for issuing, suspending, or withdrawing the certificate, and the actions taken by the CB should a suspension or withdrawal need to take place.
- · Policies  and  procedures  in  response  to  appeals,  complaints  and  disputes  shall  be documented.
- · Record  Control  Procedures  which  shall  outline  the  process  and  requirements  for  the collection,  use,  protection,  storage,  holding  and  destruction  of  records  in  line  with accreditation and legal requirements.
- · Document Control Procedures which shall specify:
- a) Approval documents for adequacy prior to issue.
- b) Review and update as necessary and re-approve documents.
- c) That changes and the current revision status of documents are identified.
- d) That relevant versions of applicable documents are available at points of use.
- e) That documents remain legible and readily identifiable.
- f) Those documents of external origin determined by the organisation to be necessary for the planning and operation of the CBs Quality Management System are identified and their distribution controlled.
- g) The prevention of the unintended use of obsolete documents, and to apply suitable identification to them if they are retained for any purpose.
- · Procedures for conducting and documenting internal audits of its QMS policies, processes, and procedures to verify compliance  with  accreditation  and  MarinTrust  Standard  and Programme requirement. This shall be conducted no less that once every 12 months and take into consideration the results of any corrective actions of previous audits.

<!-- image -->

- 2.2.2. Have a system in place to ensure that all auditors, assessors, and CB personnel (contracted and subcontracted) conduct themselves in a professional manner. The following provide examples of required behaviour:
- · Impartial, i.e., unbiased, treats all equally
- · Ethical, i.e., fair, truthful, sincere, honest and discreet.
- · Open minded, i.e., willing to consider alternative ideas or points of view.
- · Diplomatic, i.e., tactful in dealing with people.
- · Observant, i.e., actively aware of physical surroundings and activities.
- · Perceptive, i.e., instinctive, aware of and able to understand situations.
- · Versatile, i.e., adjust readily to different situations.
- · Tenacious, i.e., persistent, focused on achieving objectives.
- · Decisive, i.e., timely conclusions based on logical reasoning.
- · Self-reliant, i.e., acts independently whilst interacting effectively with others.
- · Integrity -aware of need for confidentiality and observing professional code of conduct.
- 2.2.3. Have  a  Policy  in  place  which  outlines  management  commitment  to  ensuring  the  provision, implementation,  and  maintenance  of  its  Quality  Management  System  (QMS)  policies, processes,  and  procedures  in  accordance  with  ISO/IEC  17065  accreditation  and  MarinTrust standard  and  Programme  requirements,  and  shall  clearly  identify  and  assign  responsibility, accountability,  and  authority  for  the  provision,  implementation,  and  maintenance  of  QMS policies, processes, and procedures.
- 2.2.4. Ensure that the CB's QMS is subject to annual review to ensure continuous improvement in the quality of services provided by the CB.
- 2.2.5. Be able to demonstrate that the fully documented QMS and associated policies and process, and procedures are made available to all personnel for the effective, impartial, and consistent implementation, maintenance, and control of certification activities.
- 2.2.6. Have procedures to ensure sufficient resources to undertake fishery assessments, facility audits, and/or  certification  activities  on  behalf  of  the  Programme  upon  entering  a  contractual arrangement with Marine Ingredients Certifications Ltd.
- 2.2.7. Have established policies and procedures for the management of impartiality which shall include a process to identify, monitor, mitigate and document risks arising in relation to the impartiality or conflict of interest.
- 2.2.8. Have policies and procedures in place for data handling and sharing with MarinTrust. This includes data necessary to process applications, the sharing of outcomes of fishery and byproduct assessment, audits and audit reports .

<!-- image -->

## 3.  Legal arrangement

## 3.1.CB Legal and financial responsibility requirements

The CB shall:

3.1.1. Be a legal entity and shall be responsible for all certification activities.

- 3.1.2. Have the sole authority for decisions relation to certification, which shall include the issuing, suspension, withdrawal, expansion, and reduction of scope of certificates of compliance.
- 3.1.3. Ensure that it has evaluated and is able to demonstrate its ability to adequality cover liabilities arising from the provision of certification services on behalf of the Programme, which shall include all operational activities and geographical areas.

## 4. Contractual Arrangements

Marine  Ingredients  Certifications  Limited,  CB,  and  applicant/certificate  holder  shall  enter  legally enforceable  contractual  arrangements  in  accordance  with  ISO/IEC  17065  and  MarinTrust  QMS requirements. Such agreement shall include, at a minimum, the following topics:

- · Prohibitions against conflict of interest.
- · The requirement to divulge to the CB any potential conflict of interest (such as prior consulting, prior employment, and the like) before undertaking a factory audit or fishery assessment, or that may arise during the audit or assessment.
- · A policy for the CB to investigate notifications of, or incidences of, potential conflict of interest and to exclude the auditor/assessor for a specific period where appropriate.
- · Prohibitions against consulting for or soliciting - consultancy or other types of work with an MarinTrust programme applicant prior to, or during a factory audit or a fishery assessment, and during the Certification Process.
- · Prohibitions against conduct or remarks that may, in the view of MarinTrust, disparage the Programme, Programme Management or Owner and related personnel, Certified Facilities, or associated Organisations e.g., CBs or accreditation bodies (AB).
- · Prohibitions against using or sharing confidential information from the applicants audited and assessed.
- · The CB shall include in the Auditor Agreements, as a minimum the above points, including specific Codes of Ethics/Conduct Obligations as outlined herein. Copies of these Agreements shall be provided to MarinTrust Secretariat upon request.
- · The CB shall include in the Fishery Assessor Agreements, as a minimum the above points, including  specific  Codes  of  Ethics/Conduct  Obligations  as  outlined  herein.  Copies  of  these Agreements shall be provided to MarinTrust Secretariat upon request.
- · Any potential breaches of these requirements that come to the attention of MarinTrust by the

<!-- image -->

CB or its auditors/assessors will be brought to the CB to formally discuss.  Conversely, the CB is required to also notify MarinTrust of such matters that may come to their attention.

## 4.1.CB contractual arrangements with Marine Ingredients Certifications Ltd

- 4.1.1. Upon  formal  registration,  the  CB  shall  be  required  to  enter  into  a  legally  enforceable contractual agreement with Marine Ingredients Certifications Ltd. The agreement will provide the basis with which the CB may undertake audit, assessment, and certification services on behalf  of  the  MarinTrust  Programme.    The  contractual  agreement  shall  not  constitute  a guarantee of certification business.
- 4.1.2. The contractual agreement shall stipulate the terms and responsibilities of each party with respect  to  conducting  assessments,  audits,  and  certification  services  on  behalf  MarinTrust Programme.

## 4.2.CB contractual arrangements with applicants for certification and certificate holders

- 4.2.2. The  CB  shall  ensure  that  a  legally  enforceable  contract  is  in  place  with  all  applicants  and certificate holders prior to the authorisation and provision of any fishery assessment and/or audit and certification activity, in line with ISO/IEC 17065 requirements, and shall include:
- · Notification to the applicant that the CB is bound to provide MarinTrust with information associated with audit/assessment results, certification decisions, and certification status.
- · Requirements in relation to the use of MarinTrust logo and certification claims.

## 4.3.CB contractual arrangements with own personnel and contracted and subcontracted auditors/assessors

- 4.3.1. The CB shall have written agreements with all external auditors and technical experts (known herein  as  'subcontracted') which  shall  include  all aspects  relating  the  confidentiality, impartiality, and conflict of interest in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065.
- 4.3.2. The CB shall have in place written agreements with all personnel involved in the certification process which obligates them, at a minimum, to the requirements listed below. The CB shall further have agreements in place with all its auditors, including its subcontracted auditors.
- 4.3.3. The CB shall ensure that all audits and fishery and by-product assessments are conducted in

<!-- image -->

line with requirements specified in document A4 -Conducting of MarinTrust Factory &amp; Chain of  Custody  audits  by  Registered  Certification  Bodies  (CBs) and  document  A3 -Conducting MarinTrust  Fishery  or  By-product  Fishery  Assessments  by  Registered  Certification  Bodies regarding conduct and behaviour.

## 5. CB accreditation requirements

## 5.1.Accreditation prerequisites

- 5.1.1. CBs wishing to apply for formal registration shall as a pre-requisite be accredited to ISO/IEC 17065:2012 Conformity assessment - Requirements for Bodies Certifying Products, Processes and Services by an Accreditation Body that is a signatory member of the International Accreditation Forum (IAF) multilateral recognition arrangement (MLA).
- 5.1.2. Have a named representative responsible for dealing with all aspects of MarinTrust Standards accreditation and be knowledgeable of the entire MarinTrust Programme.  This person shall be named and their position in the CB recorded on the application document. If this named representative leaves the employment of the CB or moves to a different role, the CB shall inform  the  MarinTrust  secretariat  in  writing  and  provide  the  name  and  details  of  a replacement, within a period of 5 working days.

## 5.2.Accreditation scope

- 5.1.3. All CBs shall be required to extend their scope of accreditation to include all standards under the Programme within 18 months of formal registration. The CB shall be able to provide documentation that confirms that they have a current and active application with the Accreditation Body (AB) for an extension to their current accreditation scope against ISO/IEC 17065:2012 to include the relevant MarinTrust Standard.
- 5.1.4. The CB shall demonstrate it is able to carry out assessment, audit, and certification activities and services in accordance with MarinTrust standard and programme requirements as part of the process for extending their accreditation scope. Registered CBs shall be required to carry out at least 5 but no more than 10 evaluations, prior to achieving extension of accreditation to include the MarinTrust programme.
- 5.1.5. CBs in application for extension to their accreditation, shall use the terminology 'Accreditation in Application' to all those applicants they certify until the accreditation extension is granted.
- 5.1.6. CBs shall also be required to ensure that all new MarinTrust standards or standard versions are included within their scope of accreditation within 18 months of the new standard or version being approved by the GBC.
- 5.1.7. The CB, at any time, shall inform the MarinTrust Secretariat of any change of accreditation status or changes to ownership, management structure or personnel involved in the

<!-- image -->

provision of certification services on behalf of the MarinTrust Programme that may affect accreditation within 24 hours.

- 5.1.8. Where the accreditation scope for the inclusion of MarinTrust programme is not achieved and/or granted within the timelines specified herein, or otherwise agreed, the CB s ' registration with Marine Ingredients Certifications Ltd may be invalidated and re-registration may not be offered until further evidence of the commitment to achieve the scope requirements provided.

## 6. Resource requirements

The CB shall:

- 6.1. Ensure  it  has  sufficient,  competent  personnel  (contracted  and/or  subcontracted)  to  cover  all fishery assessment, audit, and certification services for the Programme in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 and MarinTrust QMS requirements.
- 6.2. Have a certification committee, or delegated/responsible person, that shall review all information and results related to the audit. Recommendations for a certification decision based on the review shall be documented. This committee shall be adequately staffed to ensure timely reviews and decision-making.
- 6.3. Ensure all personnel (contracted and/or subcontracted) undertaking fishery/by-product assessment,  audit,  or  certification  activities,  including  peer  and  technical  reviewers,  have  the relevant and appropriate knowledge and expertise of the industry sector and geographical scale (global) covered under the Programme in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 and MarinTrust QMS requirements.
- 6.4. Be able to demonstrate the competencies which shall include, but not limited to, the following:
- · Technical skills
- · Qualifications
- · Experience
- · Training
- · Authorisations and approvals

The importance of demonstrable competency and must extend to the areas of the MarinTrust programme  against  which  the  CB  will  be  conducting  fishery  assessments,  factory  audits,  and certification activities.

<!-- image -->

6.5. All  personnel (contracted and/or subcontracted) involved in fishery assessment, audits, and/or certification activities on behalf of the Programme have been appointed, trained, and approved in accordance  with  ISO/IEC  17065  and  MarinTrust  requirements  outlined  in  document  B2 -Procedure for the appointment, training, and approval of Certification Body auditors, assessors, and trainer, which includes requirements for:

- · Qualifications, training, and experience.
- · MarinTrust Standards Training.
- · MarinTrust exams.
- · Calibration / witness &amp; shadow.
- · Ongoing training.
- · Ongoing monitoring of competency and performance.

6.6. Personnel (contracted and/or subcontracted) that have not been approved in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 and MarinTrust QMS requirements are not used at any time to undertake fishery assessment, audit, or certification activities on behalf of the Programme.

6.7. Maintain a detailed, up to date record of all relevant personnel (contracted and subcontracted) in accordance ISO/IEC 17065 and MarinTrust QMS requirements, which shall include, but not limited to, the following:

- · Name and contact information
- · Organisation and position held
- · Qualifications
- · Experience and training
- · Competency evaluation
- · Approvals and authority held with the CB
- · Monitoring and assessment of competency and performance
- · Affiliations,  professional  status,  and  any  relevant  consultancy  to  identify  any  possible conflict of interest or risks to impartiality.

Note: Personnel  utilised  by  the  CB  to  conduct  auditor/assessor  training,  calibration  and competency reviews shall also demonstrate proper experience, training, and competencies as described above and be a recognised by the MarinTrust programme within the CB.

These records shall be made available to the MarinTrust Secretariat and supplied on request and in accordance with the Quality Management System requirements.

<!-- image -->

## 7. Communication

MarinTrust  welcomes  communications  with  CBs  and  information  exchange.  MarinTrust  will,  from time-to-time, seek CB input into the MarinTrust programme, related documents, and on the auditing, assessment, and certification processes.

MarinTrust recognises the importance of accreditation during the development of the Programme and certification process. It has consulted with experienced CBs, ABs, and relevant stakeholders to ensure that  all  requirements  of  relevant  certification  are  met.  MarinTrust  will  continue  to  liaise  with  all approved CBs and ABs (as appropriate) in the further development of the Programme.

The CB must agree and communicate to MarinTrust at least the following:

- · All offices that offer to make certification decisions, and/or issue certification to MarinTrust programme shall be duly registered with MarinTrust and with their AB.
- · Each auditor is qualified to perform the auditing services he/she performs on behalf of the CB in accordance with the criteria set out herein and other related MarinTrust programme documents and has complied with all training and competency requirements.
- · Each assessor is qualified to perform the fishery assessment services he/she performs on behalf of the CB in accordance with the criteria set out herein and other related MarinTrust programme documents and has complied with all training and competency requirements.
- · The person(s) in the CB who is the designated trainer and monitor of MarinTrust approved auditors and fishery assessors.
- · It maintains an accurate record of the qualifications of each auditor/assessor and the training undertaken by such auditor/assessors.
- · Any changes in key personnel- named representative and trainer who are engaged by the CB to manage the certification process of applicants to the MarinTrust programme.
- · Any changes to accreditation status such as loss of accreditations or changes to the scope (see also 5.1.7 herein).
- · All information supplied to MarinTrust and/or the AB by the CB is, or was when given, true, accurate and not misleading.
- · The CB has the power and all necessary consents, licenses, and registrations to conduct their business and to enter and perform the contract.
- · The CB has read, understood, and shall comply with their obligations and requirements as laid out in this document and other MarinTrust programme documents.

<!-- image -->

## 8. Use of the MarinTrust Certification Logos

The MarinTrust logos  are the  intellectual  property  of  Marine  Ingredients  Certifications  Ltd  and  its authorisation  and  rules  for  use  are  controlled  via  an  agreement  between  Marine  Ingredients Certifications Ltd, certificate holders, and registered CBs.

All registered CBs shall:

- 8.1. Have established guidance, processes, procedures, and legally enforceable arrangements for the governing of the use of MarinTrust logo, reference, or claim of certification in accordance with ISO/IEC 17065 accreditation and MarinTrust QMS requirements.
- 8.2. Take ownership and appropriate course of action to address incorrect or fraudulent use of the MarinTrust logo, reference, or claim to certification.

<!-- image -->

## AMENDMENT LOG

| DATE                                                       | ISSUE                                   | AMENDMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | AUTHORISED BY                                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Version 2 edits (MarinTrust conversion)                    | Version 2 edits (MarinTrust conversion) | Version 2 edits (MarinTrust conversion)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Version 2 edits (MarinTrust conversion)                                                  |
| July 2021                                                  | 2.0                                     | MarinTrust Header &amp; Footer inserted                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Libby Woodhatch                                                                          |
| July 2021                                                  | 2.0                                     | Wording throughout document amended  to  read 'MarinTrust',  'MarinTrust  Standards'  or  ' Marine  Ingredients  Certifications ltd'  as appropriate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Libby Woodhatch                                                                          |
| July 2021                                                  | 2.0                                     | Section 4.4  -  update of document B3 title  to  explicitly  include  chain  of  custody  standard.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Libby Woodhatch                                                                          |
|                                                            |                                         | Section  4.5  -   update  of  minimum  audit  day experience to reflect current practice                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                          |
| July 2021                                                  | 2.0                                     | and auditor appointment requirements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Libby Woodhatch                                                                          |
| February 2023                                              | 3.0                                     | accreditation scope requirements for the  MarinTrust Programme  Removal  of  reference  to  the  process  of  registration in Section 1 and replaced with  reference  to  D2  -  Procedural  approval                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Governing Body  Committee  Committee                                                     |
|                                                            | 3.0                                     | criteria  for  CBs  wishing  to  apply  approval  to  audit  and  certify  to  MarinTrust Programme                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Governing Body                                                                           |
| February 2023                                              |                                         | for  the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                          |
| February 2023  February 2023  February 2023  February 2023 | 3.0  3.0  3.0  3.0                      | Section 2: Update to general requirements  to  alignment  with  ISO/IEC  17065  requirements  and  addition  of  further  information and updates related to QMS  (2.2)  Reordering  and  renumbering  of  content  for  improved  continuity  of  information  requirements  and  increased  alignment  with  ISO/IEC  17065  requirements  throughout  Addition of further, clear guidance on the  legal and financial responsibility of the CB  in alignment with ISO/IEC 17065, Section  3.1.   Update  to  contractual  arrangements  (Section 4) to ensure clear guidance and in | Governing Body  Committee  Governing Body  Committee  Pending  Governing Body  Committee |

<!-- image -->

|               |    | accordance  with  17065  requirements.                                                                                                                                       | ISO/IEC                                                                                    |                           |
|---------------|----|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| August 2022   |  3 | Update to , Section 5 and reference of IAF  and  MLA  to  ensure  requirements  in  line  with  ISO/IEC  17065  Accreditation                                                | clarity  on  the                                                                           | Governing Body  Committee |
| February 2023 |  3 | information  in  relation  to  specific  CB  Section  6,  reference  to  containing  detailed  procedures  and                                                               | personnel, which has been superseded by  resource  requirements,  and  specific  documents | Governing Body  Committee |
| February 2023 |  3 | Addition  of  further  and  clearer  guidance  on the use of MarinTrust Certification logo  in  alignment  with  ISO/IEC  17065.  This  section has been moved to Section 8. |                                                                                            | Governing Body  Committee |
| April 2023    |  3 | Addition  of  specific  reference  update  the  scheme  owner  where  there  are any changes to accreditation status.                                                        | or  CBs                                                                                    | Governing Body  Committee |